# SQL Part 2 - Joins and Subqueries

## Cross Join

The simplest join is called cross join, which is also known as a cross product or a cartesian product. A cross join is the result of combining ever row from the left table with every column from the right table with every row from the right table. To do a cross join, simply comma separate the tables you would like to join. Here is an example:

```
SELECT *
FROM courses, enrollement;
```

If the courses table looked like this:

| num | name |
| --- | --- |
| CS 186 | DB |
| CS 188 | AI |
| CS 189 | ML |

And the enrollement table looked like this:

| c_num | students |
| --- | --- |
| CS 186 | 700 |
| CS 188 | 800 |

The result of the query would be:

| num	| name | c_num | students |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CS186	| DB | CS186 | 700 |
| CS186	| DB | CS188 | 800 | 
| CS188	| AI | CS186 | 700 | 
| CS188	| AI | CS188 | 800 | 
| CS189	| ML | CS186 | 700 |
| CS189 | ML | CS188 | 800 |

The cartesian product often contains much more information than we are actually interested in. Let's say we wanted all of the information about a course (num, name, and num of students enrolled in it).

We cannot just blindly join every row from the left table with every row from the right table. There are rows with two different courses in them! To accoint for this we need a join condition in the WHERE clause to ensure that each row is only about one class.

To get the enrollement info for a course properly we wwant to make sure that num in the courses table is equal to `c_num` in the enrollment table because they are the same thing. The correct query is:

```
SELECT *
FROM courses, enrollment
WHERE num = c_num
```

which produces

| num	| name | c_num | students |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CS186	| DB | CS186 | 700 |
| CS188	| AI | CS188 | 800 | 

Notice that CS 189 which was present in courses but not enrollement did not figure n the output because it cannot fulfill the join condition.

## Inner Join

The cross join works great, but it seems sloppy. We are including join logic in the `WHERE` clause. It can be difficult to find what the join condition is.  In contrast we can write:

```
SELECT column_name(s)
FROM table1
INNER JOIN table2
ON table1_column_name = table2_column_name;
```

So for our earlier example:

```
SELECT *
FROM courses INNER JOIN enrollment
ON num = c_num ;
```

which is essentially the same, just better syntactic sugar.

## Outer joins

Now lets address the problem we encountered before when we left out CS 189 because it didn't have any enrollement info. We still want to keep all the data fom a relation even if no match exists. To fix this we need to use a left outer join. This makes sure that every row from the left table will appear in the output. If a row does not have any matches with the right table, the row is still included and the columns from the right table are filled in with NULL. Let's fix our query.

```
SELECT *
FROM courses LEFT OUTER JOIN enrollment
ON num = c_num;
```

| num | name | c_num | students |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CS186 | DB | CS186 | 700 |
| CS188 | AI | CS188 | 800 |
| CS189	| ML	| NULL |NULL |

We can mirror this query with a similar query that should give the same output:

```
SELECT *
FROM enrollment RIGHT OUTER JOIN courses
ON num = c_num;
```

Let's say we modified the enrollement table:

| c_num | students |
| --- | --- |
| CS 186 | 700 |
| CS 188 | 800 |
| CS 160 | 400 |

Now the problem is depending on if we choose left or right outer join, we will either keep info about 189 or keep info about 160, but not both. It's mutually exclusive. To prevent this, we do a full outer join which guarantees that all rows from each table will appear in the output. If a row from either table does not ahve a match, NULLs willa ppear.

```
SELECT *
FROM courses FULL OUTER JOIN enrollment
ON num = c_num;
```

| num | name | c_num | students |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CS186 | DB | CS186 | 700 |
| CS188 | AI | CS188 | 800 |
| CS189	| ML	| NULL | NULL |
| NULL	| ML	| CS160 | 400 |


## Name conflicts

Up to this point our tables have had columns with different names. But what happens if we change the enrollement table so that it's `c_num` column is now called `num`?

| num | students |
| --- | --- |
| CS 186 | 700 |
| CS 188 | 800 |
| CS 160 | 400 |

Now there is a num column in both tables, so simply using num in your query is ambiguous. We now have to specify which table’s column we are referring to. To do this, we put the table name and a period in front of the column name. Here is an example of doing an inner join of the two tables now:

```
SELECT *
FROM courses INNER JOIN enrollment
ON courses.num = enrollment.num
```

Annoying to name tables fully so alias:

```
SELECT *
FROM courses AS c INNER JOIN enrollment AS e
ON c.num = e.num;
```

| num | name | num | students |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CS186 | DB | CS186 | 700 |
| CS188 | AI | CS188 | 800 |

we have 2 columns named num, let's fix that:

```
SELECT c.num AS num1, c.name, e.num AS num2, e.students
FROM courses AS c INNER JOIN enrollment AS e
ON c.num = e.num;
```

| num1 | name | num2 | students |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CS186 | DB | CS186 | 700 |
| CS188 | AI | CS188 | 800 |

## Natural Join

Often in relational databases, the columns you want to join on will have the same name. To make it easier to write queries, SQL has the natural join which automatically does an equijoin (equijoin = checks if columns are equivalent) on columns with the same name in different tables. The following query is the same as explicitly doing an inner join on the `num` columns in each table:

```
SELECT *
FROM courses NATURAL JOIN enrollment;
```

The join condition: `courses.num = enrollment.num` is implicit. While this is convenient, natural joins are not often used in practice because they are confusing to read and because adding columns that are not related to the query can change the output.

## Subqueries

Subqueries allow you to write more powerful queries. Let's look at an example...

Let's say you want to find the course num of every course that has a higher than average num of students. You cannot include an aggregation expression (like AVG) in the WHERE clause because aggregation happens after rows have been filtered. This may seem challenging at first, but subqueries make it easy.

```
SELECT num
FROM enrollment;
WHERE students >= (
    SELECT AVG(students)
    FROM enrollment;
);
```

## Correlated Subqueries

The subquery can also be correlated with the outer query. Each row essentially gets plugged in to the subquery uses the values of that row. To illustrate:

```
SELECT *
FROM classes
WHERE EXISTS (
    SELECT *
    FROM enrollment
    WHERE classes.num = enrollment.num
);
```

This query returns all classes that appear in both tables. The subquery compares the `classes.num` (num of the class from the current row) to every `enrollment.num` and returns the row if they match. Therefore, the only rows that will ever be returned are rows with classes that occur in each table. The `EXISTS` keyword is a set operator that returns true if any rows are returned by the subquery and false if otehrwise. For CS 186 and CS 188, it will return true (because a row is returned by the subquery) but for CS 189 it will return false.

## Subqueries in the From

```
SELECT *
FROM (
    SELECT num
    FROM classes
) AS a
WHERE num = 'CS186';
```

returns: CS 186


## Subquery Factoring

Subquery factoring can simplify queries by giving a subquery a name to be used later. To do this, we use the `WITH` clause:

```sql
WITH courseEnrollment AS (
    SELECT c.num AS num1, c.name, e.num AS num2, e.students
    FROM courses AS c INNER JOIN enrollment AS e
    ON c.num = e.num;
)
```
