# Memory and Disk

Whenever a database uses data, that data must exist in memory. Accessing this data is relatively fast, but once the data becomes very large, it becomes impossible to fit everything in memory. Disks are used to cheaply store all of a database's data but they incur a large cost whenever data is acceessed or new data is written.

## Disk API 
The basic API for disks include READ and WRITE which stands for trnasferring "pages" of data from disk to RAM and transferring "pages" of data from RAM to disk respectively. Note that both API calls are very slow due to the structure of magnetic disks.

## Disk Structure
Platters usually spin at around 15,000 RPM. The arm assembly moves in or out to position a head on a desired track which is under heads and makes a "cylinder". Only one head reads/writes at any one time. The block/page size is a multiple of (fixed) sector size.

## Accessing a Disk page
Times to access (read/write) a disk block are listed as below:
- seek time (moving arms to position disk head on track); 2-3 ms
- rotational delay 9waiting for block to rotate under head); 0-4 ms
- transfer time (actually moving data to/from disk surface); 0.25 ms per 64KB page

## Disks vs SSD
Solid State Drives (SSD), or Flash, is another medium to store data. Different from magnetic disks, SSDs are organized into cells and support fast random reads. Note that in contrast to SSDs, hard disks perform very bad on random reads because spatial locality is important for disks and sequential reads are faster. SSDs support fine-grain reads (4-8k) reads and coarse-grain writes. However, the cells in SSDs tend to wear out after a certain number of erasures for writes (only 2k-3k erasures before failure). To combat this issue, it uses a technique called "wear leveling" to keep moving write units around to make sure that no single cell is repeatedly written over and over. SSDs are gnerally more epensive than hard disks too. (1-2MB writes)

Storage Heirachy
- Registers (small, blitzing fast)
- L1 Cache (insane fast)
- L2 Cache (super fast)
- RAM (very fast)
- SSD (fast)
- Disk (big, slow)

## Disk Space Management
Disk Space Management is the lowest layer of DBMS. ## TODO
